OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                             MI-03




Matrix inequalities and norms


Sharp additive triangle constant for an odd
number of contractions
Diﬀiculty: challenging       Importance: interesting to specialist
Status: Lean verified

Rating rationale: Sharpness for every odd summand count needs a new extremal construction or ob-
struction; the payoff is concentrated in operator triangle inequalities.

Resolution — 2026-09-11

Aﬀirmative result by Matthew J. Colbrook, Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical
Physics, University of Cambridge. Independent proof review: PASS.
The sharp additive contraction constant is 𝑐𝑘 = 𝑘/4 for every 𝑘 ≥ 2, including every odd summand
count. Exact dimension-two extremizers match the universal upper bound.
The exact target is resolved. The original statement and source evidence are retained below; its former
diﬀiculty rating is historical.
Primary manuscript: complete proof PDF, standalone TeX, Theorem 1.1 and its proof; authorship and
scope. The independent review checks the full original argument and records its hash. The draft was AI-
assisted. That original review was informal; the later Lean verification is documented below. External
human peer review is not claimed. Submission record.

Lean proof and verification evidence - 2026-09-12

The complete original odd-summand conjecture is Lean verified. The proof at revision 901ba5f proves
that 𝑘/4 is the least member of the full admissible-constant set for every 𝑘 ≥ 2, then identifies its actual
real infimum. This includes every odd 𝑘 ≥ 3, with all positive dimensions and every tuple of complex
contractions. Genuine principal CFC moduli and Euclidean operator norms are used; no literature
inequality is assumed as an unproved premise.
Lean formalization: George Stepaniants, Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Cal-
ifornia Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA, with AI-agent assistance. Matthew J. Col-
brook retains authorship of the mathematical proof and result; Jean-Christophe Bourin and Eun-
Young Lee retain the original conjecture and prior-bound credit.
The eight checked exports, each with prefix NLA.MI03., are:
 • modulus_semantics: genuine positive square root, square and norm identities.
 • contraction_modulus: positive modulus defects for every complex contraction.
 • positive_decomposition: the exact universal Gram-sum and positive-square identity.
 • universal_upper_bound: admissibility of 𝑘/4 for every 𝑘 ≥ 2.
 • root_of_unity_data: exact complex roots and their vanishing geometric sums.
 • sharpness_witness: true moduli, unit operator norms and full sums of the two-dimensional extrem-
   izers.
 • sharp_constant: actual least admissible constant and infimum, for every 𝑘 ≥ 2.
 • odd_contraction_conjecture: the complete original assertion.
Two independent agents approved the statements and completed proof. Linux run 34722618003
matched all eight declarations with the sandboxed Comparator and replayed the solution in Lean’s
default kernel. The original artifacts and operational audit bind all 173 input files and both actual
isolation/rejection-control suites. All 16 internal/public transitive axiom reports use exactly propext,
Classical.choice and Quot.sound. The operational reviewer also served as final proof referee 1; these roles
do not count as a third mathematical referee. External human peer review is not claimed.

Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                              1
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                            MI-03




The pins are Lean 4.33.1, LeanCert 621a43d and Mathlib 0df444a. LeanCert audits this exact proof’s ker-
nel trust; there is no numerical interval certificate. Symbolic identities and all-𝑘 roots avoid numerical
phase approximation or interval subdivision. The source’s extra three-dimensional Hermitian extrem-
izers and rank classification are outside these exports; the complete original target is covered. See the
project guide, manifest and dependency pins. From the immutable verified revision on a documented
non-root Linux host, reproduce with:

tools/lean/bootstrap.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/selftest.sh /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools
tools/lean/verify.sh \
  matrix-inequalities-and-norms/MI-03/lean \
  /absolute/path/to/nla-lean-tools


Problem statement

For each integer 𝑘 ≥ 2, let 𝑐𝑘 be the infimum of all 𝑐 ≥ 0 such that

                                                    ∣ 𝑘   ∣          𝑘
                                                    ∣∑ 𝐴𝑗 ∣ ⪯ 𝑐𝐼𝑛 + ∑ |𝐴𝑗 |
                                                    ∣     ∣
                                                    ∣𝑗=1 ∣          𝑗=1


for every 𝑛 ≥ 1 and all 𝐴1 , … , 𝐴𝑘 ∈ ℂ𝑛×𝑛 satisfying ‖𝐴𝑗 ‖2 ≤ 1. Here |𝐴| = (𝐴∗ 𝐴)1/2 , ‖ ⋅ ‖2 denotes the
operator norm, and 𝑋 ⪯ 𝑌 means 𝑌 − 𝑋 is positive semidefinite.
Is 𝑐𝑘 = 𝑘/4 for every odd integer 𝑘 ≥ 3?

Why it matters

The scalar absolute-value triangle inequality fails in matrix order. The optimal additive correction quan-
tifies that failure for uniformly bounded summands, in a form usable in positive block-matrix estimates.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                             2
OPEN PROBLEMS IN NUMERICAL LINEAR ALGEBRA                                                              MI-03




References

1. J.-C. Bourin and E.-Y. Lee, Diagonal and off-diagonal blocks of positive definite partitioned matrices,
   arXiv:2307.02034v3 (15 December 2023), Corollary 4.4 and the conjecture immediately following
   Remark 4.5. Primary text.
2. E.-Y. Lee, How to compare the absolute values of operator sums and the sums of absolute values?, Operators
   and Matrices 6(3) (2012), 613–619; §2 supplies related triangle inequalities. Primary paper, DOI.

Status check — 2026-09-10

Corollary 4.4 establishes 𝑐𝑘 ≤ 𝑘/4 for every 𝑘 and sharpness for even 𝑘; the source separately conjectures
sharpness for all odd 𝑘 > 1. Its latest version remains v3. Searches included Bourin Lee contractions odd
k constant k/4, three contractions 3/4 sharp conjecture, and Bourin contractions sharp 2025 2026. The 2026
symmetric-modulus papers concern different inequalities. No resolution of this additive odd-summand
problem was located.
Audit update (2026-09-10): Rechecked the conjecture after Remark 4.5 in Bourin–Lee and searched for
odd-summand sharpness results. The proved even-summand statement is outside the target, which
already restricts to odd 𝑘. This is a bounded literature check, not a proof that no solution exists.




Editorial ratings; a bounded search cannot certify that a problem remains unsolved.
Literature check: 2026-09-12                                                                               3
